So in this video we're going to take a little break from learning about fundamental coding concepts
and techniques in Java going to use what we've learned so far in this section to build a nice fun but
simple app called higher or lower.
You may have played this game before but it's pretty simple.
The app generates a random number between 120 and we have to get it.
So let's see it in action.
If I get 10 for example the apple tell me that I need to go higher.
OK so I'll guess 15 again lower sets lower than 15 August 13 lower again I guess 12 and I got it right
and then I get the option to try again with a new random number.
So pretty simple but should use everything we've learned so far this section and you'll need to google
a couple of things as well.
The main one will be how to generate a random number which we haven't done before.
So I think you'll be able to manage that.
But as always if you have any problems or would rather just follow along with me doing it you can do
that as well.
Now I have a go to it yourself.
Take time to pause the video and create your higher or lower app.
Go for it.
OK.
As always that way.
Well let's get cracking.
So I'll start with a new project.
I'll call it higher or lower.
And then pick all the usual options
and let that set itself up.
OK.
As usual we'll start by designing the look of our app so we'll get rid of that text we and then add
in a new one.
Just give us a bit more room to work with
and then change the text to you.
I'm thinking of a number between 1 and 20
there we go.
And I think we'll Centuri
go in left right and top margins and then we'll bring in a second text view.
Saying Can you guess it.
And we'll make it all the same but a little bit just to bring a bit more attention to it.
And then we'll set the same margins for that one too.
OK then we'll bring in our number
text Phil
which I'll leave
as non-full with this time I think we need a whole full screen with just a number between 1 and 20.
And finally we'll need a button
which
will contain the word guess and the on click method will also be guess
and let's add some constraints to make the button centered as well.
I the constraints for the text.
I did.
Excellent.
OK.
That looks good as usual.
I'll just run it in the background while I'm writing my code.
Save me time later on.
And then all I'm going to do for now is just create a public method which doesn't return anything called
Guess which is called by a view.
And to add the View class it's been a few videos since you've done this now.
So it might be slightly rusty I'm sure it will come flooding back to you or any other low class and
then in FE and Button
OK.
There we go.
Now can you predict what will happen if i guess now.
We actually have our first app crash and that's of course because I added the guess method to the guest
button before I had written the code so it tried to run the gas method but the message didn't exist.
So let's try again.
Now that we've actually written the code for the gas method
I have a little look in the logs that we get button is pressed.
All right so now for the meat of the app the first thing that we need to do is actually find a random
number or generate a random number.
And that's something we don't know have to do yet.
So let's have a look.
I hope we get Java.
Generate a random number.
Notice I didn't put Android in there there's nothing particularly specific to Android about generating
a random number so I'm just searching for Java.
Here we go.
So looks like we need the random class and then we create a new variable of type random name rand which
is a new random object of the class random.
We'll be looking more about objects and classes and a couple of videos time.
So that should become slightly clearer what this thing is and then we create an integer.
So a whole number N which is equal to.
Now this is slightly odd.
We take our Random object and then create an INT from it.
So the next it essentially creates a random number from our Random object.
And as you can see in the comments down here the next and 50 here on its own creates a random number
between 0 and 49.
So if we want a random number between 1 and 50 we need to do next and 50 plus one.
We want a random number between 1 and 20.
So what will we need.
I'm sure you got that next.
Twenty plus one.
So let's copy this code.
We don't need to copy the input bit because Android studio should do that for us.
Let's think a little about when we actually want to create the random number.
We don't want to do it when they've pressed the guest button.
Otherwise we'll generate a new random number every time they try and guess and they could be there for
a very long time.
So we'll create a random number in the on create method.
We haven't actually used this yet but we noticed it back in the first section.
And if you remember this runs code when the app is loaded.
So this is a good place to create our random number.
So let's paste that in.
There we go.
It's offering to add the random class for us.
And we want to change the bound as it's known to the upper bound in this case to 20
and we'll call this random number.
All right so now we've generated our random number we need to be able to access it in our guess method.
Now you may have noticed if I try and type random number it doesn't give me the order predict.
Now we've already talked a little bit about variable's scope and this is a case where it's very important
we've created the variable random number inside the create method.
That means it's not available anywhere outside that method.
So an easy way round that is to create the variable
in
the main activity class itself.
We don't need to give it a value yet but then we can use it anywhere in the main activity class.
So in the gas method in the uncreate method wherever we like so we don't need to create it again we
can just access it.
And now we'll be able to use it inside our guess method as well.
Excellent.
So let's just quickly change our logging code so that it locks the value of random number.
Just said that we know that we've got a random number and we're accessing it correctly.
So we've got an integer here to be able to log it.
We're going to need to convert it to a string.
So let's do a quick search.
Java convert it to string
we get.
I think we can be pretty sure of that.
It's very familiar to integer to string.
And the thing we want to convert to a string is random number
OK.
So now when we press the guest button we should find in the locks our random number that's like
that we get we've got to 5.
Fantastic.
That looks very promising.
So now it's a matter of getting the value that the user has entered and comparing that to the random
number to see if it's higher or lower or if they've got it right.
So I should be familiar with this by now will create and edit text.
We're going to need to cast it as an edit text because we're going to get it using find view by id and
the ID is going to be our ID to edit text which is the default.
I didn't change it.
And then again just to take it really slow.
Well Loek
the end to the valley which is going to be added text don't get text taught to string and I'll just
update that say random number
OK and then once we've just verified that we're getting the entered number and the random number correctly
we'll do our comparisons.
Here we go so into the number 6 and fantastics have entered the value of 6 which is right.
And a new random number all looks very promising.
So in order to check whether our number is bigger or smaller or equal to the random number we're going
to need to convert it to an integer.
You can probably guess how we might do that.
But let's just do a quick search anyway.
Ok then we're going to go integer instead of pass double as we used before.
We're going to use pass in OK.
So let's create an integer variable
we'll call it guess value.
And that's going to be integer to pass in.
And the thing we want to convert is our edit text don't get text
dot to string.
OK.
Now we'll have the first about if statements.
So if the guess value is greater than the random number
then we want to display a message to the user through a toast.
And that message is going to be I need to go lower.
Now I could write my toast command right here.
But actually I'm going to need that several times or rather than writing out TOSed code several times.
I'm going to get round that by creating a string called message and then we'll just update the message
depending on the outcome.
And then we can have just a single TOSed command which will save us code which keeps it easier to read
leaner and easy to update as well.
So if their guess is too high the message is simply going to be lower else.
Another option is that guess value is less than the random number in which case they need to go higher.
Well the only other option is that they got it right.
So it will say You've got it
and then regardless of what the outcome is we want to create a toast
and the text is simply going to be message.
All right let's give it a gang.
So I'm going to start by guessing 10 or higher.
All right.
15 lower 12.
Lower.
OK so it must be 11.
Fantastic.
Works perfect.
The only thing it doesn't do is allow us to play again once we've got it right.
So let's just add in a bit of code to generate a new random number when they get it right which we can
do by just copying that code there.
Now we could leave that as it is but we've now got the same code twice which I don't like.
So let's get into good habits and create a method for it.
So we'll call it generate random number
and creates
a new random object from which will generate a random number equal to the random number variable.
Then we can just use generate random number there.
And also here.
So if we decided that we wanted the game to last a bit longer we could change that to a 50 say and we
wouldn't have to change it twice in our code.
So a minor timesaving in a app as simple as this but in a more complicated app sort of changes can make
huge differences.
So you got it.
Try again.
All right.
Let's just give that a try.
So I'm going to go for the same tactic again 10.
We need to get higher 15 0.
There we go.
Got it straight away.
Guess 15 again so now we've got a new random number.
It's still low for still lower to still lower.
So it must be a 1.
We got it.
Fantastic.
That's it.
So I hope you manage to do something reasonably similar to that.
Now let's get back to our Java deep dive and learn about loops.